# rusty_elma

//////////////////////////////////////// Note on Organization //////////////////////////
Please note the following organization. For grading purposes I have left in the goals and milestones previously written, but you will find them all the way at the bottom of this README.

//////////////////////////////////// An intro to Rusty Elma /////////////////////////////
Rusty Elma aims to be a port of the ELMA project written in C++ into the Rust programming language. ELMA is a task management system developed by klavins (see the following link).
https://github.com/klavins/ECEP520
Rusty Elma aims to be a management system wherein one can create different processes, data channels, and events. In the management system of Elma, one can then have all of these sub-systems talk to each other and coexist.

//////////////////////////////////// Using the Code ////////////////////////////////////////
To use the code…
1.	Pull from the repo
2.	Build the docker file with
Docker build -t rust_cont -f rust_interactive.dockerfile .
3.	Run the container with
docker run -it -v $PWD:/source rust_cont bash
4.	Build elma with “Cargo build”
5.	Running the code does nothing since there is no code in main. This would normally be done with “cargo run”
6.	Run all tests cases with output using “cargo test -- --nocapture”
7.	Compile all documentation with “cargo doc”

//////////////////////////////////// Rust directory explanation /////////////////////////////
The first thing to do when creating a rust directory is to use the command
cargo new proj_name –lib
I preferred to use the –lib identifier when doing my project because it creates a lib.rs file in which you can specify which modules to include in a library which gets created at compile time. You can then include this library in other files aka the separate test directory.
From the main repo directory you will see a few important sub-directories. The ones of interest are “src”, “docs”, “test”.
The src directory contains all the source files which make up ELMA. This is all the actual code which gets compiled into the ELMA library. There is further documentation on the src files in the src directory.
The test directory is where all the unit tests are placed. Rust knows to look in this test subdirectory for extra tests, though they could be placed in the src directory as well. I have followed the method of keeping all tests in this test directory and separating them from the source files. This keeps the directory clean, the files shorter, and prevents including unwanted things in the compiled ELMA library.
The docs directory contains all the documentation for the project. One can use the built in command…
Cargo doc
This will create documentation based on the directory structure and the comments placed in the code. This is placed in the target directory, which is ignored by the gitignore, but I have pulled it out and checked in the final comments for easy viewing.
The comment structure is similar to doxygen. If you look in the docs folder you can find a really nice html file which is great for navigating the code and has all my rust comments, but unfortunately I had a hard time integrating that with github-pages. The github-pages did not play nicely with the html generated by Rust.
